[Transcript missing]
Thanks Sergio.
Today I'm going to talk about
how to use the OpenGL pipeline
to get real impressive 2D
performance out of the platform.
This includes both 2D or
traditional viewing pictures,
those kind of things, and 2.5D,
maybe some work with sprites,
work with movies and
those kind of things.
We'll see how you can really use
the OpenGL pipeline to display
those 2D kind of raster images.
So first we'll talk about why
are we talking about OpenGL,
a 3D API for 2D work.
Then we'll move on to
implementing 2D with OpenGL.
Things I'll talk about first
is how to display images.
We'll talk about how to load images into
textures and use textures to image from.
You can use this,
extrapolate this to using anything
you generate from your program.
We've seen demos before in the past
with using PDFs as a source of a texture
and texturing that onto an object.
You can do the same techniques there.
We'll move on to talk about
sprites and side scrolling.
I use side scrolling kind of loosely.
With OpenGL, obviously,
there's no limitation on whether
you're going to use it for vertical
and horizontal scrolling or you're
going to create the next great game,
the next recreation of Defender.
And then we'll talk a little
about QuickTime integration
and beyond using just the
QuickTime API for loading textures,
how we can use the QuickTime API and
Movie to integrate with
OpenGL to display them.
[Transcript missing]
But I would be remiss if I didn't
talk about why not OpenGL.
What things about
OpenGL may turn you away?
Where may you not go down
the right pipeline here,
so to speak, by thinking about using
OpenGL for your application?
First, it works very well in
16 and 32 bit modes.
But it does have some problems
if you're trying to get high
performance in an 8 bit mode.
The 8 bit mode is going to be,
you're going to fall into the software
case and in a lot of special cases,
we have special, you're doing a palette
animation for example.
If you're doing palette animation,
OpenGL doesn't have a real equivalent
of doing 8 bit palette animation,
so I suspect that your application
could be specially coded to handle
that in a case better than OpenGL.
So that would be a case that you may
want to not think about using OpenGL and
use a special case of your own.
Also, let's say you're doing fonts.
You want to have very scalable fonts.
You want to do a specific font.
You want to do a specific kerning
with fonts or handle Unicode fonts.
OpenGL doesn't have any built
in properties to do this.
You could combine Quartz
and OpenGL to do this,
but really if you're trying to do
like the next InDesign or PageMaker
or those kind of applications,
you probably want to think about using
the Quartz 2D API because that really has
a robust feature set for handling images,
handling fonts and those kind of things.
While OpenGL really is where the high
performance bit images can be handled.
So what are we going to talk about?
First,
we're going to hop into image display,
talk about texture loading,
and talk about orthographic
display and scaling.
Then we're going to talk about sprites
with alpha blending and alpha test,
and talk about using some
matrix manipulations to
move them around the screen.
Then we'll work that right
into the side scroller,
showing a large scaling background
with sprites flying around on that.
And lastly,
we'll talk about QuickTime integration.
First let's talk about image display.
One of the key things here
is how to load textures,
how to get any texture or any
image you want into your system.
We're going to use a
QuickTime image compression API.
It's a great API for loading images.
You can bring up a Nav Services dialog
and select any image you want,
use QuickTime to load it.
You didn't have to worry
about whether it was a BMP,
a TIFF, a PIC, a JPEG, whatever.
It'll load it for you.
It'll put it in a buffer you can use.
Some of you who've
looked at this may say,
"Well, hold on.
If I use new GWorld for that buffer,
I have some padding problems." I'll
show you how to get around that.
We'll show you how to use
any buffer that you can take.
You're going to take a non-padded
buffer and you can use that
directly for texturing to OpenGL.
With that, you want to use PacPixels.
The PacPixels extension or the PacPixels
that is in OpenGL 1.2 drivers will
allow you to use a texture format
directly from the image to an off-screen
G world to a texture without having
to do any pixel swizzling whatsoever.
So you don't have to touch
those pixels unless you want
to do some special effects.
The three methods we'll
talk about is first,
the simple way.
OpenGL must have a power
of two textures currently.
So what we're going to do,
the first way we'll talk about
scaling with QuickTime to a
power of two texture on load and
then fixing it as we display it.
Next we'll talk about segmenting
the power of two textures.
A little bit more complicated,
where you take a large image
that is of abstract size,
any size you want,
and you segment it down so you get
the pixel perfect representation
of that image in multiple textures.
And lastly, we'll talk about-- we're not
going to really talk about it.
I'll talk about it here.
We'll talk about texture rectangle.
Texture rectangle is an extension coming
down the road that will allow you to
take any shape or size-- not any shape,
but any rectangular texture
that is not necessarily a power
of two in texture with that.
All the vendors are working
hard to support that.
We're working hard to support that.
So look for that in the future when
you're talking about image loading
and image handling with OpenGL.
It will allow you to handle textures
of arbitrary size directly into
the OpenGL hardware accelerator.
I think I better take a
drink of water for this one.
The QuickTime Image Compression API.
Let me actually back up a
little bit with the code here.
The code I'm putting up here will
all be available in sample code.
There's no code you'll see on the screen
that you'll not be able to get a hold of.
So don't try and take specific
notes exactly how to do it on this.
Most of this stuff will be up
before the end of the week.
Some of it's up already,
and the rest of the stuff
will probably be up next week.
So you'll definitely be
able to get at the code,
and look at it yourself,
and look through it, and decipher it,
and figure out what
we're doing with that.
So if you listen hard,
I think I can go through and explain
exactly what's happening here.
First thing you do is get
graphics importer for a file.
You have an FS spec from your
Nav Services dialog or something
that you create yourself.
And you get graphics importer for file.
It returns the GI comp variable there.
What then I do is get the
natural bounds of that.
Basically tells me how big the image
is so I know what I'm working with.
Second thing I do after that
is decide on what the stride
of that image is to create a
pointer for it to hold that image.
The reason I do this is that's
a step you may not normally see.
That step, creating the stride,
tells you exactly, bit for bit,
what's the width of that
image without padding.
And then that new pointer,
I'm going to create a buffer
that's exactly the size of
that image without any padding,
without any padding through a 4-byte,
or anything that a
GWorld may normally do.
I then call qt new GWorld from pointer.
It's not a function you see very often,
but it works very well because
it will use that pointer I've
created for that new GWorld,
and you're supplying the memory,
you're supplying the padding.
It will say,
I know the information there,
I have the stride at the end,
so I'm going to use that packed
image buffer for the GWorld,
and I'm not going to
allocate any memory myself.
That is key to using packed pixels and
using direct texturing to OpenGL because
that allows you not to have to skip rows,
not to have to do-- strange things with
the image before using it with OpenGL.
And you see there's two
different versions here.
The reason there's two
different versions,
and you probably could make it one with
assigning that constant to a variable,
but in this case,
I wanted to show you that there
is two K32 ARGB pixel format
and K16BE555 pixel format.
Those are open--sorry,
those are QuickTime constants
that indicate to QuickTime what
kind of pixel format you're going
to have in that GWorld there.
[Transcript missing]
So lastly, we're going to do a
graphics import set G world.
Graphics import set the
quality for lossless.
We're going to get the G world pixmap.
Of course,
remember to lock that and check
the value of your lock on the
return because you don't want
to draw into a non-lock pixmap.
It's not good enough just
to call that lock pixels.
And then use graphics import draw,
unlock pixels, and close your component.
Now, in that pixmap that you've
created is the image off the disk.
No problems.
So what are some other
things we want to talk about?
Let's talk about packed pixels.
How do we get that image into OpenGL?
First, real critical,
if you're using AGL,
make sure you use AGL no recovery.
AGL no recovery says,
I don't want to create a software
backup render to back up if the
system runs out of resources for this.
What that does in this case, it says,
I want to respect the
hardware's pixel formats only.
So if you're sending to a hardware,
all you're going to do is
create the pixel format.
OpenGL is only going to use
the pixel format for that one
specific piece of hardware.
It's not going to try and
use a software backup,
which happens to not
support packed pixels,
so it may convert everything to 32-bit.
So if you have a 16-bit format here,
you want to make sure you
do that to keep it 16-bit.
You need OpenGL version 1.2 or the
GL Apple Packed Pixel extension
to support packed pixels.
And if you notice,
one thing you'll notice,
the extension string is packed pixel,
not packed pixels,
which I think it's listed.
And this is just a little caveat.
So if you search for packed pixel,
no matter which way we go with that,
if it changes in the future,
you always make sure you get it.
Because if you search for packed pixels,
you may not get it in the
future or the other way around.
In any case,
the key here is GL text image
2D with a BGRA extension and the
unsigned in 8888 reversed and the
BGRA unsigned short 155 reversed.
The way you read that is the reverse of
the pixel format applies to the BGRA.
So it's ARGB.
155 or ARGB 888, which we recognize as a
standard Mac pixel format.
Thus, you can use these to directly
texture out of your image buffer.
So scaling to power of two,
what do we do with this?
You notice I have the
example images here.
The first one's like a 256 by 256
compressed down to exactly what
the texture's going to look like.
What we're going to do with this is
we're going to restore the aspect
ratio by storing the image aspect
ratio that we read in and setting the
polygon's aspect ratio to the same image,
texturing to fill the polygon,
which will just stretch it back out.
Again, we're losing information here,
but the image appears
correct on our screen.
So scale the power of 2.
This piece of code here is actually
pretty simple and maybe easier
to look through it on your own.
But really what I'm doing
here is fairly simple.
What I do is if the image
size is-- I step through,
I take my largest--
the largest power of two that I want,
and I step through and remove
that from... I'm sorry,
that's incorrect.
Basically what I'm going to do is
I'm going to use the fact that I can
shift things down a power of two at
a time by using the shift registers.
And I'll shift it down
until there's nothing left.
When there's nothing left,
I'll put a one in the first
bit and shift it back up.
And what that does,
it tells me the largest power
of two image that's nearest.
And then at the end, I basically say,
if it's closer to one than the other,
I check the above and below.
So basically I got to the point where
I have a power of two that is going to
be smaller or larger than the image.
So if I had a 249 pixel image,
I shift it all the way down,
and when I shift it back up, I got 256,
because I have that one bit
in one of the... I have a one
in one bit of the image size.
And then I compare that
to that shifted to 128,
and I see which is closer.
So I'm getting the nearest one.
So what this little piece of code does,
it defines the nearest power.
So I can see the nearest power of two.
There's probably different
ways to slice it.
I thought this was probably
the easiest way to do it.
And it's not real easy to explain,
but I think if you step through it,
you can see how it's working.
And that's all.
I'm just bringing up the demo machine,
and I'll show you this in action here.
What we're going to do is we're
going to choose a file to open here,
and this is going to open an image.
And it's just going to
display it in OpenGL window.
If you notice, it's a standard window,
standard image.
Remember this image does
not have the complete image
quality that we had originally.
If you look at the text,
which may be hard to read up there,
but I'll tell you what it says.
It's a 640x480x32 bit image.
That obviously isn't a power of 2.
We've put it into a 512x512 texture.
And then we've rescaled it out so it
looks exactly like the right image.
If you want to see the actual polygon,
I can zoom it out for you.
That's actually a single
polygon with a single texture,
512x512 stretched back to the
correct aspect ratio for the image.
One of the nice things you see
here is high performance 2D,
right?
That's what we're talking about.
This is high performance 2D.
Using the OpenGL transforms,
no problem rotating the image.
And if you want to zoom in,
we can do that too.
Very easy.
We'll go to full screen.
Still get really nice transforms,
real easy to manipulate
images using OpenGL.
Using OpenGL as your 2D transform.
But you say, you know,
really I want all that information that,
uh,
we can go back to the presentation now.
I want all the information that
I had in the original image.
I want to have all that,
I don't want to lose information.
Oh, let me back up.
If you notice,
if you look carefully at the
screen saver in Mac OS X,
OS X uses the same technique.
It translates all the images to
512 by 1024 textures and uses that.
But you said, man,
that screen saver looks great,
great detail.
You're losing detail.
If that image is 768 tall,
it's squished down to 524.
If it's 900 wide,
it's stretched out to 1024.
So it uses that to get consistent
images and to have easy texture loading.
So that's an actual use of
this in a 2D environment.
And you can see then they can get
the fades using the OpenGL hardware
acceleration instead of having to
do some kind of fade themselves,
which is going to be real hard
and real taxing for the system.
So the other option we have
is segmenting to power of two.
You don't want to lose that.
And this is an interesting technique,
a little bit more complicated,
but it uses the same
basis as the other ones.
In this case, what we have is you can
see the image there,
and the green lines indicate the actual
polygons that comprise that image.
And I've segmented this image
to about four by four as
far as using it to display.
And so I've kept all the
pixels directly in one texture,
and then I'm sliced out of
that texture for each image.
The way I do that is when
you call GLTextImage2D,
you provide it with a base address.
That base address can be manipulated.
It doesn't have to be the
beginning of your buffer.
So what you can do is provide it
with the beginning of every single
segment of that buffer very simply.
The other thing you can provide
is OpenGL has a constant
called unpacked row length.
And normally, the width you pass into
GLTextImage2D is the width that it uses.
Obviously,
if you were taking a piece out of this,
that wouldn't make any sense
because it would be all skewed.
It would try and take the next pixel
over and stick it on the end of your
image so you get this kind of skewed
image that came across your screen.
We'll set unpacked row length to
actually the width of the entire image,
vice the width of that little
piece of texture we want.
So what it'll do is for every row,
it'll skip that much.
That's like its image stride.
It'll skip that much and
come down to the next one,
grab a piece of it,
skip the entire rest of the row,
and grab the next piece.
So it'll have that nice lined
up pieces of the polygons when
it actually tries to draw it.
So we use the image width
and the unpacked row length,
and then the texture width will
be some smaller subset of that.
OK.
Segmenting to power of two.
What we're going to do is this
first black box statement up here
basically tells me how many textures
I have in the image dimension.
Same technique we kind of used before.
Basically what I do is I say, OK,
I know that if I look at the bitwise
representation of that dimension,
I can just kind of count the
bits that are actually turned on.
So if I look at the ones and zeros,
I can go, how many ones are there?
And that's the number of
textures I actually need to use.
It's real simple.
Works very well when you realize that
that's a nice little thing to have.
I then do a new pointer
clear for texture names.
And that's texture x by texture y.
So I'm going to create an array that
I can store my texture names in.
I'm going to use pixel store i,
as we talked about, for the image width,
for the entire texture
width in this case,
the entire texture width.
And then I'm going to do a gen
textures to generate texture names for
each texture I need for that image.
So in that case,
you saw those are 4 by 4.
I'm going to generate 16 texture names.
Then when I draw the image,
I'll use gl bind textures.
I'll bind each texture in turn.
And I'll draw the image that way.
So let's look at actually
getting it into memory.
Another little black box
function we have here,
that I'll show you in a few minutes,
is get next texture size.
It takes where you are
currently in the image and says,
what's the next size?
What it does is I say
I have a max texture size.
This is what I was talking about earlier.
I got confused.
I have a max texture size I want to use,
256, 512.
Maybe I don't want to go
up to 2000 for an image.
Maybe I want to keep it down to 128,
so I have 128 segments,
whatever you prefer.
It steps through 128,
removing that from the
length of the image.
And then once it gets past that,
once there's less than 128 left,
it takes the next biggest
power of 2 off the image,
and it keeps doing that kind of down.
So it keeps doing 128, 64.
Okay, there's no 32s.
I'll give you a 16,
and then whatever else you got left.
In this case,
we get the next texture size in the loop.
We go for X and Y for
each of our textures.
Our offset is 0 for the Y offset.
That means we're going in the columns.
We're going to start at the
top of the image for every row.
Above this,
we're going to have the X offset
is 0 at the very beginning.
And what we're going to do,
is we're going to take
the pointer to the buffer,
is the normal image buffer we
got before from Quick Draw,
when we used the QGNUG from pointer.
We're going to use the offset
Y by the texture width,
times the image depth,
divided by 8 in this case, is shifted 3.
So what basically we're doing is saying
that this is going to offset into the
image for that corner of every texture.
So we offset across for X,
offset down for Y for every row,
and we offset in based on what the
width of each texture we need to get.
to use this.
Get the next texture size for the height.
We've got it for the width,
so we put in the previous texture size.
We call bind texture.
We do that bind texture.
We pick the next texture
name in our list of 16.
And then we basically do
the same GL text image 2D.
If you notice, I'm using the P buffer,
and I'll go back a slide.
The P buffer is that P buffer,
not the P image buffer.
The P image buffer was
the original pointer.
And the P buffer is the pointer
to whatever specific texture.
And we bound,
we've told it the unsigned row length,
unpacked row length is the
width of the whole image.
And so we use the GL text image
2D at that point to grab the
right texture out of the image.
So we're kind of doing the cookie cutter.
Take a piece, take a piece, take a piece,
move down, take some more pieces,
and we slice our image up that way.
This is a little snippet of code from the
Get Texture Numb from Texture Dimension.
Same kind of thing.
First thing I'm going to do in
this is I'm going to remove what
are my max size of textures.
I have max text size.
I'm going to divide by max text and count
how many max texture images fit in there.
Then I'm going to take
whatever is left over,
the Texture Dim I reset there,
and I'm going to,
is there anything of 8,000?
Is there anything of 4,000?
Is there anything of 2,000?
Is there anything of 1,000?
I just go down each one.
If you notice, when you add all that up,
it will add up back to the
complete size of the image.
So this tells me how many
textures across I have or down.
And lastly here, get next text size.
This says, hey,
I got the size of my current one.
Is it one of the first max size ones,
or am I going to step down into my list
and basically do the exact same thing,
checking to see if I have an 8,000,
a 4,000, a 2,000, a 1,000, like that.
So, how do we display these things?
First, we're going to use an orthographic
display set up to the scale of the image,
the scale of the screen.
So, the images you saw,
I scale your display to be
the pixel scale of the window.
So, when you're manipulating them,
if I offset three pixels,
I'm offsetting three
pixels in the window.
So, this actually is a
good way to display it,
so you're thinking like a quick,
like quick draw, or normal,
what you're used to thinking as far as,
you invert the x,
you invert the y coordinate, your x is,
your origin is in the upper left corner,
and at that point you're moving
things in a pixel centric manner.
I may ignore z, I don't need z,
so I don't need to
establish a depth buffer,
and I ignore z for this one.
I use poly,
I'll use a polygon to scale the image.
When you saw me scaling it out,
that image before,
I used a polygon to scale,
I used to manipulate
the polygon positions,
I didn't use any texture coordinates,
I didn't scale my window at all,
all I did was scale my polygon size,
my texture stayed the same,
and OpenGL takes care of the whole thing.
It takes care of the hardware accelerated
transform to get it onto the polygon.
And you can use the model view
matrix very simply in the,
in this case, to offset and rotate.
So, as you saw me drag,
I just do a drag on the mouse,
I use a real, real nice Carbon events,
tell me when the mouse drags,
I figure out what the start point and
the end point for the mouse drag is,
and I just drag the image
by that many pixels.
My offset,
since I'm already in pixel space,
is exactly that when I apply
it into the model view matrix.
Rotation,
I get the rotation in degrees for the,
for the turn of the mouse,
and I apply it in to the
rotation matrix of the,
around the z-axis for the model view
matrix to manipulate the rotation of it.
And now we're going to
go back to the demo.
And one thing about the multi-texture
demo here is that I can load
the same image I did before.
If you notice this one,
it's tiled in multiple textures.
Let's expand it out.
And I'll zoom in a little bit to
actually see what it looks like.
What you see in there is the actual pixel
grid of the actual pixels on the screen,
or actual pixels of the image.
And you can see how the textures
actually lie right on the pixel grid.
So you can see that these come together.
Right on the pixel grid of the image.
And OpenGL does a great job
of stretching that image.
I mean, there's only a certain
amount of data there,
but it does a great job
of scaling the image.
And you've still got great
performance on this 640x480 image.
But you say, you know,
maybe I want something bigger.
So, I had to dig around to
find a bigger image,
but I did find a bigger image,
and I haven't tried this one for a while,
so hopefully this one will be okay.
This one takes a while to load,
and I kind of remember
how big this image is.
I think it's 2800 by 2100.
So it's a pretty big image.
If you look at the polygons,
we'll zoom out a little bit.
Those are five, the max texture size,
nine by six, I think the max texture
size is 512 in this case.
So, 2800 by 2100.
Pretty nice.
Oh, you want to rotate it?
We can do the rotation too.
That's easy to do.
You want to zoom in to
see the actual inference?
Nice detail there for the image.
So you can see OpenGL works very
well for handling 2D images.
One thing that might be interesting is,
see if I can find one of these.
We'll help ourselves.
People who've been working with
OpenGL say there's a little
problem with my technique,
and there actually is.
If I can find the corner.
It'll show up right here, probably.
You kind of can see it here,
not very well.
Actually, it's better than I thought.
There is a discontinuity along that line.
And there's probably
better examples of it.
Let me see actually if
I can find a better one,
because it's kind of a
good thing to understand.
Probably on the edge here
we'll be able to see it better.
Back toward the middle you say?
I can see it.
How about down here?
Okay, you'll have to think-- oh,
there it is.
Actually, you can see it right there.
See across there?
You can see right across
here there's a discontinuity.
The discontinuity is
OpenGL uses filtering.
OpenGL filters across the texture
to-- when it tries to magnify and
minify by a texture by texture
I don't know what the best way to put it.
It looks at each texture separately.
Remember,
you've moved this image from image
space that you had to the textures,
and it looks at each texture
separately and wants to filter it
when it tries to do the scaling
for minification and magnification.
What that means is it looks at
the next pixel over and says,
what is the color of the next pixel?
Well, in this case,
it says there's no next pixel.
It's the edge of the texture.
So there's a filtering
discontinuity between two edges.
So if you really want the
perfect representation of this,
something I didn't do in this demo,
what you can do is take a texture border.
You can take a border of one
row of pixels from your image.
So you make your textures like one
pixel smaller and take a border
around them so that minification,
magnification filtering is more accurate.
Not something I did here,
but you can do it if you want
the perfect example of this.
So again, this is scaled up like
two and a half times,
and you can see that it does a
pretty good job on this stuff.
So we'll go back to the slides.
Okay,
let's move on to talking about sprites.
Sprites are actually pretty simple.
Sprites are just going to be
textures handled by OpenGL.
So we'll load the sprite frames
and store them in textures.
Well what are we going to do for sprites
that have multiple images in them?
Most people who want to use sprites want
to handle multiple images in one sprite.
Even if you want an animated cursor,
for example, how would you do that?
What you can simply do is have one
texture that fits all of your sprites
or some of your sprites in there.
And you can set it up so that your
sprite frames are offset and you
use the texture coordinates to
offset into those sprite frames.
So you load the whole thing in one
texture and instead of like we did
before where you're loading a segmented,
that one image into a segmented texture,
you're loading one texture and
then using it as a segment,
in segments by using texture coordinates
every time you go to a polygon.
For example, if you had a polygon,
if you had ten sprites,
you would use a tenth of the texture
coordinates for that one sprite and
you can maneuver across depending on
what sprite frame you're talking about.
One thing you can also,
most people want to do with sprites is
they want to use some kind of masking.
I want to use a mask.
They don't want to have just that cursor,
just my cool animated cursor
spinning around or whatever.
They want to use some kind of masking.
So how do you do that?
Well, you can easily do it by passing
an alpha channel or if you
read an image from QuickTime,
you may not be sure of the alpha channel.
You may not be sure that's the
exact alpha channel you want.
So you want to go in there and blast
the alpha bits as something you know.
In this case, I used a background color,
pure green,
and I looked for it basically to
the green screen kind of thing and
I just removed the green screen
by setting alpha of that to zero.
I did this a couple times.
And the first time I did it, I was like,
"Oh,
I'm going to do this." And I was like,
"Oh, I'm going to do this."
I did this a couple times.
And the first time I did it,
I came out with what's on your
right-hand side here with that
little green line around it.
It was a pretty cool little effect,
but again, texture filtering.
That is because it looked
at the next pixel and says,
"Ah, I know there's green there.
You want me to filter from that
green onto your image and that's
what I'm going to give you." So what
you can do is the other image,
what I did was I said,
"I'll put kind of a neutral gray in
there." And the neutral gray allowed
me to filter it to a reasonable color.
So that's something to just keep
in mind when you're doing it.
Something that OpenGL will
want to filter that.
And it will use both filtering on alpha
and filtering in the image domain.
So you want to make sure your
filtering is set up correctly
if you're using an alpha mask.
So let's talk about how to do alpha mask.
Basically, you want to set the
alpha channel on load.
You want to look at the alpha channel
once you load it with QuickTime,
and you want to blast the
exact bits you want into it.
In this case, we're talking about the top
eight bits in 32-bit format,
or the top one bit in a 16-bit format.
If you wanted to,
you can use other formats, by the way.
I'm not limiting you to these.
These are just something
that I'm using for the talk.
But you could use a 444 format.
OpenGL would understand that,
which would give you the four
bits of alpha in a 16-bit
representation of colors.
Basically, background color pixels,
we're going to set the alpha to zero.
And we're going to set the
pixel value of those pixels to
some neutral background color.
For all other pixels,
we're going to make sure
the pixel is set to alpha.
So in this case, in the 16-bit case,
we'll OR that with 8,000 hex.
And in the 32-bit case,
we'll set the two high bits to
FF to basically make sure they're
all ones in the two high bits.
You want to ensure the alpha is set.
Because sometimes,
depending on where the image comes from,
I've seen images that I thought
out of Photoshop that I had
set the alpha correctly.
And it comes through a format.
And when I look at it coming
through into the machine,
the alpha is not set like
I would expect it to.
So just make sure you keep that in mind,
that you have a known
source of your alpha,
or you're setting it into
what you want to set them to.
So, how do we do this?
It's actually pretty simple.
If it's a 32-bit image what we're going
to do is we're going to get the pixel
from the image buffer we saw before.
We're going to step through
for texture width and texture
height through the whole thing.
We're only going to look at the
bits that are our color mask.
In this case I'm saying green.
FF in 32-bit format is our color mask.
So, what I'm doing is I want to
ignore the alpha on these bits.
I don't want to compare to 00, 00, FF.
I don't want to compare to all 32 bits.
I only want to compare
to the 24 bits of color.
So, I'm not sure about that alpha.
So,
I may have a difference in alpha and it
won't quite match my source color key.
So, I'm going to look at the color bits.
So, I'm going to mask those color bits
out and if they equal that pure
green I'm going to set the pixel to
a reasonable gray in this case with
a 00 in the high bits for alpha.
So, it will be blank and the
filtering will look good.
If not, I'm going to OR that with FF.
And the reason I'm going to OR it
with FF is to make sure that those
two alpha bits are set at the top.
Or eight alpha bits.
So, there's two in hex.
Two digits are set for alpha.
And then I'm going to loop
through the next pixel.
For the 16 bit case, very similar,
in this case I'm going to compare it to
the 7FFF to mask out that one alpha bit
and make sure that 3 is 0 which is the
same five bits of set for the green.
I set it to a neutral
gray or set the top alpha
So let's talk about alpha blending.
So there's another way.
You say now you have the sprite mask.
You have your cursor
that you move around.
You've cut out the background in.
We're going to talk about alpha blending.
Another thing you may want to have
is some kind of transparent texture,
some kind of feature, some kind of,
you know,
you have the heads-up display in a game.
You want to just use
that with alpha mask.
Real simple to set up an alpha mask.
In this case,
what I'm going to do is I'm going
to use the luminance value of
this texture to set an alpha mask.
That's what this is an example of here.
What I'm going to do is I'm
going to take the average,
which is actually I'll correct
myself before anyone else does.
This is not actually the luminance value.
This is my poor man's luminance value.
If you want to really do
the YUV conversion and
just take the Y component,
you should do a correct YUV conversion.
But in this case,
I'm going to assume this is grayscale.
All the bits are the same.
And so really the divide
by three is not necessary,
but it looks good for the presentation.
So,
we take our poor man's luminance value,
we divide by three to
get the average for 2.55,
we're going to shift it up
into the high bit and we're
going to or it into the pixel.
So in this case,
what we're going to say is
whatever the kind of gray
scale value of that pixel is,
is going to be the alpha.
So we'll get transparency that
varies with the luminance.
This is good if you get some
artist that has some kind of
background or something like that,
that you just want the luminance value,
you want to set an alpha that equals it,
you can use this kind of technique.
How do you draw with these things?
What are the key open GL,
the unlock the open GL kingdom here?
We get GL alpha funk.
What I do here, this is the masking.
We talk about the alpha mask,
the first thing we talked about.
In this case, we're going to say greater
than .5 or less than .5.
If it's greater than .5,
we're going to draw it if
it's less than .5 or not.
In this case,
when we set everything to zero,
we won't draw anything.
When we set it to one, we will draw.
If our polygon needs alpha test
or if our sprite needs alpha test,
we'll turn alpha test on.
For blending for transparency,
we use a blend funk.
In this case, we'll use source alpha and
one minus source alpha.
Basically, let's say the contribution of
the front pixel is source alpha.
It's the source's alpha value.
The contribution of whatever is
there already is one minus that.
If your alpha is .8,
you can see the source
is 80% contributor.
The background is about 20% contributor.
We enable blending.
If we have transparency.
Lastly, depth test.
You may want to do a depth test.
So if you have multiple pixels--
[Transcript missing]
So let's talk a little bit
about how to do a side scroller.
Most people,
when we think of side scrollers,
we think of like 1400 by 480 kind of
backgrounds that you play Defender
on or run around in your 2D version
of Quake or whatever you're doing.
And most people think of using
a 2D raster engine to move these
things around to the screen
because we can compact it down,
we have a lot of black space,
we can use the parallax scrolling.
I'm saying you can use OpenGL to
get a much faster version of this
with a lot less limitations on you.
What we're going to do is we
use tiled images to form a
large textured background.
Pretty unlimited.
You can even load the tiles.
And I mean if you think of
something like Diablo 2,
it actually was a similar
method where it loaded terrain,
loaded sprites as it needed to.
It was a forced perspective
kind of 2.5D thing,
but in reality it was still kind of
the same idea of using an accelerated
engine to drive something that
could have been done years ago.
would attempt to be done
years ago with a 2D engine.
So we use the grid of
polygons for the background.
And there's a lot of different
ways to draw the grid of polygons.
We toyed around with it.
We've been talking about it.
And there's some different kind of
techniques you can use as far as deciding
what's on the screen and off the screen,
depending on your limitations.
So I'm not going to try and
tell you exactly how to do that,
because I found out that
depending on what your limitations
are of your application,
you can find some ways are really
easy and some ways are very difficult.
The idea here, though,
is that you keep a grid of polygons.
You're going to draw something
slightly bigger than the screen,
or make sure you draw the polygons that
are actually present on the screen.
And you're going to draw the ones
you need to as the person moves,
whether it's north, south, east, or west.
When they move that way,
you're going to draw
some additional polygons.
Basically,
when you draw the gridded polygons,
you're going to find out
what your world center is.
In this case,
we just attach it to a sprite,
and we pick that sprite's world center,
and we offset everything
else by that world center.
So everything else just moves
off the screen as it would.
So you don't have to worry
about some kind of strange
transform you're writing yourself.
Just use OpenGL's model view matrix and
transform it as you would with the world
center attached to one of your sprites.
We're going to rotate
it by world rotation.
So if your sprite rotates,
you can rotate the entire world,
or you can rotate your sprite,
whichever way you'd like to do it.
So there's no limitation that everything
has to be kind of orthographically
displayed across your screen,
which, I mean, if you're thinking about
it from a 2D standpoint,
I'm not thinking that it's going
to be real easy to take a 1400 by
480 image and turn it slightly.
OpenGL can do that for you,
as we've seen.
And you're going to scale by world scale.
Most of the time,
you can't zoom in and zoom out.
In this case,
you can zoom in and zoom out.
Or you could draw your little
radar map up in the corner
of your game or application.
Or showing how you're manipulating
a large image by just showing a
scaled version using mipmaps of that
larger texture you've already drawn.
So how do we handle textures?
You load the background as one
texture or a set of textures.
But basically you load a large
image as a single large texture.
You're going to segment it with
the techniques we've shown before.
And you're going to let OpenGL do
the texture handling for you.
We use GenTextures to generate
texture lists as we've seen before.
And we'll let OpenGL handle the
memory management in and out of
VRAM or in and out of the AGP space.
Because the OpenGL implementation on 10
does a very good job of handling AGP and
it's going to get better in the future.
And you really should take
advantage of that fact.
Instead of trying to have
your own what's in memory,
what's not in memory,
what's load something,
what's remove something,
just let it handle it for you.
It'll push things out you're not using.
It'll bring things in that you need.
And I think you'll find it'll
be very effective in managing
those textures for you.
And this is again the same
as your segmented images.
This is exactly the same technique
we've talked about before.
So how do you draw this?
In my case,
I set up an orthographic context.
I thought about it later and I thought
it would be really cool that you
could use a perspective context
actually for your side scroller.
And when you zoomed in and zoomed out,
it actually would have
that kind of parallax,
weird zooming.
But I didn't have time to do that.
But that's something to think about.
So, I mean, if you really don't have to
set up an orthographic context,
you can say, think about it as your art
workbench where you're looking
straight down at one of those,
you know, camera mounted above a table.
You actually can change
or use the GL you look at.
And you can change the field
of view and the aspect.
If you want to zoom in,
you just change your
field of view to be wider.
You want to zoom out,
you change it to be narrower.
You change your near and far planes.
And that kind of thing you can do and
gives you a lot of the features that
you really would work hard for doing
it yourself with your own 2D engine.
You can give it to you with
hardware acceleration in OpenGL.
In this case,
we're going to pin the world
to a sprite of interest.
Here's another good thing you can do.
Let's say you have some kind of
strategy game or something that you
have multiple places of interest.
You have a very large
document you're handling.
The user can jump to an area
of interest very easily by just
manipulating the center of that image.
Do a lookup of your sprite
information or do a lookup of
information into your document.
You can jump to this
object on my document.
I want to see how it's
positioned in my preview.
They can do that basically by using
readout where that position is and
offset to that position without having
to do some kind of calculation or having
to move a lot of pixels around yourself.
What I did was to draw the sprites,
I basically do a--you kind of grossly
call the sprites to your visible list.
You don't want to send OpenGL every
single sprite that's off the
screen in your massive area.
But you grossly call the ones
you think are close to visible.
Let OpenGL do the fine work.
You may find if you spend
way too much time on this,
you may find that you're not
going to get the results you want.
You may find if you spend
way too much time on this,
you may find that you're not
going to get the results you want.
if you spend way too much time trying
to replicate the transformations,
trying to figure out exactly what's
on the screen and off the screen,
you're spending a lot of time doing that.
One thing I'll tout here is the
OpenGL optimization session tomorrow
with John Stoffel will look very closely
at what OpenGL can do for you and what
it can't do as far as optimizations.
So come to that session,
look at his example of optimization,
and apply it to your same application.
Make sure you know in real time
what percentage of time you're
in your application and what
percentage of time you're in OpenGL.
Null out those drawing routines
and find out if you run
your application open loop,
what actually is your
possible frame rate.
A lot of times you'll find that you're
not really spending much time in OpenGL.
You're spending a lot of
time in your application.
It doesn't matter how fast
the graphics engine is,
you're going to have to
improve your application speed.
Gain a strong understanding
of the design and construction
of optimized image display,
sprite, and live scrolling engines
using the OpenGL API.
I'll open my sprite file.
There's a couple sprites here.
I think the background
image is 2000 by 1600.
I have another texture in
there that's 1000 by 1000,
both 32 bit.
And then I have my sprite images which
are also they're actually 256 by 256 and
I just used a scaling of OpenGL to do it.
So we're going to run around
and see what this thing can do.
So as you can see I can move
the rocket back and forth.
I can fly around very easily.
And we can zoom in or we can zoom out.
Real nice that you get a nice feedback.
And if I can do this right,
I probably can find Apple on here.
This happens to be a
photograph of Cupertino.
Let me see if I can do this.
Where am I?
Oh, up, up, up.
I think we're up there.
No, can't find Apple.
I'll find it later.
In any case,
you can see what I did here for
the poor man's version of tiling.
I flipped the image.
And I just used OpenGL to
do the same image.
You can zoom in.
You can see that.
And we got the cloud layer there.
So we have a nice layer of
clouds that's flying over it.
One thing you can do is this
is your standard side scroller.
You kind of fly around
and scroll side to side.
One thing you can do also is you
can do this very easily in OpenGL,
which works the same.
It's doing the same amount of work.
So I can fly around, in this case,
in my standard method of the top is up.
have a pretty convincing game and
make you all sick at the same time.
So we'll go back to the presentation now.
And the last thing we're going to
talk about is QuickTime integration.
How do you integrate QuickTime?
And I have about 10 minutes,
and I think I can get through this.
A lot of this we've talked about already.
Same techniques.
This whole thing is using
the same techniques.
It's all based on the same stuff.
It's not rocket science.
It's not separate stuff.
You learn some of this stuff once
and apply it to all these techniques.
Qt New GWO from Poynter.
We've seen that at
least three times today.
That is how you're going to allocate
the texture to get a packed texture
format without having any extra space
to help not allow you to texture.
We're going to use packed pixels
for direct texture handling.
We're going to synchronize to
QuickTime to minimize our update.
What that means is we're going to give
a callback procedure to QuickTime to
tell us when it updated the frame.
If we haven't updated the frame,
we're not going to update the texture.
What this means is the only
textures uploaded to the card are
the ones that actually got updated.
You can see, obviously,
if you upload the frame
every single time,
it's like playing an uncompressed game.
You can see how that can compare to a
compressed movie where you're only really
updating the frame every time it changes.
If you have an OpenGL that
can do 100 frames per second
and QuickTime is updating the
movie at 24 frames per second,
there's no reason to update that texture.
Let the texture sit in VRAM and then
only update it when you need to.
Drawing, we're going to use subtext
image to--that's wrong.
...maybe wrong.
In any case,
we're going to do a subtexture upload.
The movies usually are not
256 by 256 or 512 by 512.
They're usually a 4 by 3,
which is usually not the texture size.
So we're going to take the subtexture
out of that and we're only going to
update the part that's actually updated.
Again, saving bandwidth to the card.
So, what are we going to do here?
New pointer clear, we've seen that.
Qt New GWorld from pointer,
we've seen that.
Set GWorld, set Movie GWorld,
we haven't seen that.
So all you're going to do
here is set the Movie GWorld,
same as we did with the
graphics compressor,
and that will tell the movie
to play into that GWorld.
Texture formats.
Pretty simple.
GeoText Image 2D, RGB,
that would be an uncompressed format,
and then you have the reversed format
showing the actual packed pixel format.
QuickTime synchronization.
Here's something new.
You look up there, you see MovieDrawUPP.
That's going to give you a universal
procedure pointer to a movie,
to the movie completion procedure.
New movie completion procedure,
so you're actually creating
it with my MovieDraw proc.
And then you're going to set the
procedure very simply for the movie.
Gmovie is actually the
pointer to your movie,
so that's something
you get from QuickTime.
and then in your completion proc,
oh sorry, if you look at the call it says
movie drawing call when changed.
So it's going to call you every time
it updates that movie into the G world.
So QuickTime will tell you
when it has something changed.
This is the only code you have
to do to let QuickTime know
when you've actually updated it.
You can see this could actually be
very useful in some other things
that use QuickTime so you know when
there's actually something changed
in the movie and you're not trying
to update something all the time.
And then the movie draw proc,
really simply.
All I'm going to do is, in the RefCon,
I have a global variable,
gfMovieTextUpdate,
and I'm going to set that to true
every time I get to that procedure.
So when I go down to draw my polygon,
I'll get all ready to draw and I'll say,
do I need to update the texture?
If I do, I'll re-update the texture
from the movie G World.
If not, I'll just draw the
polygon with the texture.
You can use the idea of current textures,
because you can bind it
to any texture you want.
You can have multiple movies playing.
You can also, in this case,
the example you'll see,
I just have one movie, one texture,
so I just leave it current.
And how do we draw?
GL text subimage 2D.
I was right.
It was wrong.
It's not subtext images.
Text subimage 2D.
GL text subimage 2D.
You'll see here,
and this basically is the exact
same thing you've seen before as
far as using the same kind of call.
You can use the 32-bit
version or the 16-bit version.
Then I'm going to move the frame.
What that does is that's just my call
to move the frame around the screen.
However,
I'm manipulating that QuickTime frame.
That's only the frame of the polygon.
I'm using the model
view matrix to do this.
I'm not doing this.
This is not manipulating
the movie pixels itself,
just the frame.
And then I'm going to do
a GL begin with quads.
And I'm going to set the texture
coordinates to the corners.
I'm going to set the color
to white for the whole thing.
You can colorize your movie if you
wanted to by changing the polygon color.
And then I'm going to
do very simple vertices.
Use basically square vertices.
And the movie is going
to be inside that square.
Let's go back to this demo.
I'm going to show you a
couple different things here.
First, in this case,
we're going to bring out a
display size of 640 by 480.
This demo does not use
a segmented texture,
but you could easily
integrate that into this demo.
This uses a single texture that
the movie is compressed into.
256 by 256 movie.
I'll use a 16-bit off screen.
Full screen, I will use PacPixels.
And I will sync to the VBL,
which we'll see how that works on this.
Actually, let me turn off sync to VBL,
and then we'll turn it
back on for the next run.
I'll pick a movie.
Have you seen this before?
And Mr.
Schaffer,
would you prefer window or aisle?
So I'm getting 620 frames per second
playing that movie through OpenGL.
It's playing the movie full screen
and then it's texturing as fast
as it can for a single frame.
So real simple there.
Now we'll stay with this demo and we will
In this case,
we'll just throw some effects in.
We'll use fog and we'll sync the VBL.
And we'll just leave it like that.
And we'll play it in a window this time.
And Mr.
Schaefer,
would you prefer window or aisle?
Middle.
So again, this is using-- Middle?
: I'm shooting about
70 frames per second.
I'm not sure about the sync on this
because it seems to be varying more
than I normally see because of the
video system that's going through.
But in any case,
you're seeing just using a simple fog,
turned on linear fog for this.
Real simple to show an
effect with a movie.
You get the full complement of OpenGL,
cool stuff you can do with it
without having to do any extra work.
: It's a little movie I'm working on.
So where do you get resources for this?
It's pretty simple.
The Red Book and the Blue Book.
If you're working with OpenGL,
make sure you've got the
Red Book and the Blue Book.
The other thing that I think that
everyone should have is in our
OpenGL SDK you'll see the spec.
Look at the spec.
I use that more than I use
the Red Book and Blue Book.
If you notice, if you look at the spec,
the Red Book and Blue Book look
very much like the spec.
But it has a lot of,
it goes into more math than many
of us want to know sometimes,
but it actually has the real
what's behind the engine,
how does it actually work,
which is real important if you want,
if you're trying to
debug something like fog.
You want to know exactly
how the fog's going to work.
Or you're trying to
look at how the texture,
the unpacked row length.
You want a good explanation
of unpacked row length.
It goes through exactly
how it handles pixels.
So I think the OpenGL 1.2.1
spec is a very good thing to
have and all programmers working
with OpenGL should have it.
It's in our SDK.
It's in a PDF format.
You can print it out and,
or look at it online.
Good places to know if
you're working with OpenGL.
www.opengl.org.
A lot of resources.
It tells you where the
current standard of OpenGL is.
It gives a complete list of
the extensions for OpenGL.
It gives you a lot of programming
examples and starter code.
List.apple.com.
Search for OpenGL.
We have an OpenGL Mac list.
I want to see you all on that list.
It's a great place to get information,
ask questions,
and we monitor the list and
try to help out when we can.
And lastly, developer.apple.com/opengl.
That's another good place to go.
All of developer.apple.com.
All of developer.apple.com URLs.
Go to the OpenGL page.
It's a pointer to the SDK,
pointer to the newest
things we got for it.
So, what did we talk about today?
We talked about using
OpenGL mainly for 2D and 2.5D,
and we did some movie stuff too,
but how OpenGL can be used to
complement your applications that
aren't interested in doing the next
Quake or the next Tomb Raider or
the next Nanosaur or Chromag Rally.
We're talking about games that want
to use just the display images,
want to use the power of
OpenGL to manipulate those images,
and it's a really great thing
that you can do it easily.
You can set up your transforms to let
the transforms handle the workload for
you and just let OpenGL do the hard work.
And we will continue to improve OpenGL,
we'll continue to work
with the hardware vendors,
get the best hardware
acceleration we can,
and that will give you,
that will continue to improve your
app even without you doing work on it.
Next, it does allow robust
hardware acceleration.
You're not going to get that
any other way you slice it.
You're not going to be able to
get to the hardware acceleration
unless you're going to use OpenGL or
use one of our provided APIs.
You just don't have the resources
and the ability to get at some
of the hardware acceleration
unless you're writing the drivers,
unless you're writing the
OpenGL implementation.
And it really shows you a new paradigm
to solve these real world problems.
You don't have to say, "Well, hey,
I use copy bits.
I'm going to rotate that and
I'm going to use that and that's
going to be really difficult.
I'll go and swizzle now,
so OpenGL." Rotate
your model view matrix,
throw it on the screen,
scale your model view matrix,
throw it on the screen.
You can shift it over, move it around.
It's real easy.
It's just a couple of instructions.
Sample code.
The samples will be up very shortly.
The movie sample is up right now.
The image sample should be
up by the end of the week.
And the rocket sample should
be up probably next week.
Let's talk about the road map.
Sergio mentioned this is
the first of five sessions.
The sessions that you want to go to are
right after this is geometry modeling.
After that, tomorrow morning,
OpenGL optimization.
John Stauffer,
the head of our OpenGL team,
is going to be in here and
is going to take you through
optimizing an OpenGL app.
It's going to be a really great session.
He has some really great tools to
show you how to optimize that app,
and I'll show you how to get the most
performance out of an OpenGL application.
Advanced rendering.
Troy Dawson,
one of our engineers in the OpenGL team,
is going to come and show some
advanced rendering techniques.
You'll definitely want to see that.
He talks about using the
stencil buffer to do shadows.
He talks about anisotropic
filtering and some other topics.
It'll be a really good talk.
We have the feedback forum for
OpenGL at the end of the day tomorrow.
Please come talk to us about
what you want to see in OpenGL,
where we're doing well,
where we're not doing well.
We want to get your feedback.
We want to take your stuff in,
and we want to make sure that we
improve it and make it the most
world-class implementation of
OpenGL and 3D graphics API anywhere.
Lastly, the feedback forum for QuickTime,
the QuickTime API,
which I think you've seen is very
beneficial to your work in OpenGL for
texture handling and for movie playback.
There's a feedback forum for
QuickTime also Thursday at 3.30.
Sergio Mello is the technology
manager for 3D Technologies at Apple.
It's a great contact if you have
questions about implementations,
questions about where we're going,
questions about what we have
today to solve your problems.
Please contact him, sergio@apple.com,
with those kind of questions.